Out of the box, AI agents have no
memory. Every conversation starts with a
blank slate. Most people think that you
need a vector database, complex
retrieval pipelines, or specialized
memory to handle this. But OpenClaus
solved it with markdown files and four
mechanisms that fire at the right
moments in a conversation. I'll show you
exactly how it works. AI models are
inherently stateless. There's no memory
between calls. Your conversation is an
increasingly long context window that
gets passed on each turn of the
conversation. This is why without some
kind of memory system, each new
conversation starts without any context
of the previous one. So how does an
agent memory system actually work?
Memory systems can be broken up into two
pieces, the session and longerterm
memory. The session can be thought of as
a history of a single conversation with
an LLM. During the conversation, the
state of it needs to be saved somewhere.
This conversation history needs to be
passed on each subsequent call you make
to the LLM for it to remember and
understand the current point of the
conversation. There's a problem though.
LMS have a finite context window.
Because of this, as you approach the
limits of your context window, a process
called compaction kicks in. Compaction
is the act of taking the session's
conversation history and breaking it
down into the most important relevant
information in order to allow the
conversation to continue without losing
all of the details of the session.
There are three different strategies for
triggering compaction. First is
countbased. This is when you compact a
conversation once it's exceeded a
certain token size or a certain turn
count in the conversation.
Second is timebased. This is triggered
when the user stops interacting for a
certain period of time. Compaction is
then triggered in the background. Third
is event-based or semantic. Here an
agent triggers compaction when it has
detected that a particular task or topic
has concluded. It's the most intelligent
version of compaction, but also the most
difficult to implement accurately
because of the context window limit. We
can't just persist and pass entire old
conversations into a new conversation
with an LLM. That is where long-term
memory comes in. The memory is what
survives at the end of a session.
Imagine a session as a messy desk for a
current project. You might have various
notes and documents scattered around
your desk. Then you might have a filing
cabinet where things are categorized and
stored. This is the memory. There's a
great framework for thinking about
memory. Google published a white paper
in November of 2025 titled context
engineering sessions and memory. In it,
they break down agent memory into three
types. The first type is episodic.
Episodic memory covers things like what
happened in our last conversation. These
are events or interactions you might
have had with the LM. Second is
semantic. Semantic memory are pure facts
or user preferences. Think what do I the
LM know about you the user or the topic.
Third is procedural. Procedural memory
covers things like workflows and learned
routines or how do I accomplish this
task. All of these come together to form
a memory for an agent. In order for the
memory system to be effective, it must
have a solid method of extracting key
details from a conversation in order to
persist them. Part of this is
understanding what is worth remembering.
Not every detail of a conversation is
going to be important. Targeted
filtering is needed in order for the
memory to be effective. Just like a
human's memory where we may not remember
full details of something. Instead, we
remember key concepts and facts. In
addition to this, it must also be able
to consolidate items in memory. For
example, imagine a user tells agent that
I prefer dark mode in one conversation.
In a later conversation, it says I don't
like dark mode anymore. And in another,
it says I switched to dark mode. Without
consolidation, all three entries sit in
the memory saying essentially the same
thing. A good memory system collapses
those into a single entity. User prefers
dark mode. It also must be able to
overwrite previous decisions or
determinations. Something that might be
true today may not necessarily be true
tomorrow. The memory system must be able
to differentiate and update its memory
knowledge bank. Without this, the memory
can become noisy and contradictory.
These are both typically handled by
another LLM instance that takes a
conversation and handles this extraction
and consolidation.
There are different ways you can store
memory from simple solutions such as
markdown files for a local agent to
specialized databases like vector
storage that can be searched for
relevant data when appropriate. Let's
take a look at a real world example of
this system in place. Open clause memory
model is a great example of agent memory
in practice. I recently did a video
explaining the underlying system of
OpenClaw at a high level. Let's take a
closer look at how its memory works. The
OpenClaw memory system has three core
components. The first component is the
memory MD file. This is the semantic
memory store for Open Claw. It includes
stable facts, preferences, and
information about your identity. This is
loaded into every single prompt and has
a recommended 200line cap. The memory is
broken up into structured sections.
Second are daily logs. Daily logs are
one of open clause implementations of
episodic memory. It contains recent
context organized by day. These memory
files are appended only which means that
new memory entries are continually added
but nothing gets removed.
Third are session snapshots. Session
snapshots are the second implementation
of episodic memory by openclaw. These
are triggered by the session memory hook
that fires when a new session is started
via the slashnew or slashreset command.
The snapshot captures the last 15
meaningful messages from your
conversation. These are filtered to only
user and assistant messages. That means
things like tool calls and system
messages and slash commands are all
excluded. It's not a generated summary,
but it's actually the raw conversation
text saved as a markdown file with a
descriptive name. So at its core, open
clause memory is just markdown files.
That's straightforward enough, but it
turns out that these files are only half
the story. Without something that reads
and writes them at the right times,
they're just sitting there doing
nothing. Remember the desk and the
filing cabinet? The files are the filing
cabinet. And what we're about to look at
are the mechanisms that move the things
from the desk to the cabinet at the
right moments. The first mechanism,
bootstrap loading at the session start.
For every new conversation, the memory
MD is automatically injected into the
prompt. The agent always has it. On top
of that, the agent's instructions tell
it to read today and yesterday's daily
logs for recent context. So the memory
MD is injected by the system and the
daily logs are loaded by the agent
itself following its own instructions.
This is the simplest pattern and the
most important one. The second mechanism
is the pre-ompaction flush. Open claw
takes a count-based approach towards
compaction. When a session nears the
context window limit, open claw injects
a silent agentic turn that is invisible
to the user. It instructs the LLM that
you're near compaction and it needs to
save anything that's important. Now,
when the agent sees this message, it
writes to the daily log. This serves as
a checkpoint for the conversation. This
turns a destructive operation such as
losing context into a checkpoint. It
follows a common database pattern or
write ahead log, saving memory before
it's lost. The third mechanism fires
when you start a new session, the
session snapshot. Session snapshots are
saved whenever a new session is started,
whether that's via the /new or/reset
command. As I mentioned in the previous
video, sessions are per channel. A hook
grabs the last chunk of your previous
conversation, filters to meaningful
messages only, and the LM generates a
descriptive slug for the file name. It's
not a summary, it's a snapshot of what
you were talking about, saved before the
slate gets wiped. And finally, the
simplest mechanism, the user just asks.
If a user says something like remember
this, the agent determines whether it
belongs in the semantic memory or memory
MD file or the daily log as episodic
memory. No special hook is needed. The
agent just has file writing capabilities
and its instructions tell it how to
route the information. And that's it.
Open Claw's entire memory system comes
down to markdown files and knowing when
to write to them. semantic memory in the
memory MD file, episodic memory in daily
logs and session snapshots, and four
mechanisms that fire at the right
moments in the conversation's life
cycle. And these patterns aren't just an
open claw. Claude Code recently shipped
the memory feature, and it uses markdown
files as well. You don't need a complex
setup to give an agent memory. You just
need clear instructions to three
questions. What's worth remembering?
Where does it go? And when does it get
written? If you want to go deeper into
agent architecture and patterns like
this, I write a weekly newsletter
covering AI augmented engineering and
building with LLM. Link is in the
description.